docs/tutorials/phase-7-hierarchical.md, before:

# Phase 7: Hierarchical / Multilevel (Random Intercepts)

This tutorial shows the minimal end-to-end flow:

1. Build a hierarchical GLM with a group-indexed random intercept
2. Run MAP fit (`nextstat.fit`)
3. Run NUTS (`nextstat.sample` or `nextstat.bayes.sample`)

See also:
- Phase 6 (regression / GLMs): `docs/tutorials/phase-6-regression.md`

## Assumptions and diagnostics (quick checklist)

- Random effects are typically modeled as **Normal** and **exchangeable** across groups.
- Partial pooling assumes groups come from a shared population (shrinkage toward a common mean).
- If some groups are tiny or highly imbalanced, posteriors can be weakly identified; consider stronger priors.
- For Bayesian fits, always check sampling diagnostics (`raw["diagnostics"]["quality"]`) and do posterior predictive checks (see PPC section).

## Logistic regression with random intercept

```python
import nextstat

# Toy dataset: 2 groups, 1 feature, binary outcome.
X = [[0.0], [1.0], [0.0], [1.0], [0.0], [1.0]]
y = [0, 1, 0, 1, 0, 1]
group_idx = [0, 0, 1, 1, 0, 1]

m = nextstat.hier.logistic_random_intercept(
    x=X,
    y=y,
    group_idx=group_idx,
    n_groups=2,
    coef_prior_mu=0.0,
    coef_prior_sigma=10.0,
)

fit = nextstat.fit(m)
print("nll:", fit.nll)
print("bestfit dim:", len(fit.bestfit))

raw = nextstat.sample(
    m,
    n_chains=4,
    n_warmup=500,
    n_samples=1000,
    seed=42,
    init_jitter_rel=0.10,
)
print(raw["diagnostics"]["quality"])
```

Notes:
- `group_idx[i]` selects the group for observation `i`.
- The random intercept is a partially-pooled Normal effect (group intercepts share hyperparameters).
- Sampling seeds are deterministic per chain: chain `i` uses `seed + i`.
- Initialization options are mutually exclusive (set at most one): `init_jitter`, `init_jitter_rel`, `init_overdispersed_rel`.

## Posterior Predictive Checks (PPC)

PPC answers: "Does the fitted model generate data that looks like what we observed?"

NextStat provides lightweight helpers in `nextstat.ppc` that work on the raw dict
returned by `nextstat.sample(...)` (no ArviZ required).

```python
import nextstat

spec = nextstat.data.GlmSpec.logistic_regression(
    x=X,
    y=y,
    include_intercept=False,
    group_idx=group_idx,
    n_groups=2,
    coef_prior_mu=0.0,
    coef_prior_sigma=1.0,
)
m = spec.build()

raw = nextstat.sample(m, n_chains=2, n_warmup=300, n_samples=300, seed=1, init_jitter_rel=0.1)
ppc = nextstat.ppc.ppc_glm_from_sample(spec, raw, n_draws=50, seed=0)
print("observed:", ppc.observed)
print("replicated[0]:", ppc.replicated[0])
```

## Linear regression with random intercept

```python
import nextstat

X = [[0.0], [1.0], [2.0], [3.0]]
y = [0.2, 1.1, 2.0, 3.2]
group_idx = [0, 0, 1, 1]

m = nextstat.hier.linear_random_intercept(
    x=X,
    y=y,
    group_idx=group_idx,
    n_groups=2,
)

fit = nextstat.fit(m)
print("nll:", fit.nll)
```

## Linear regression with random slope

Random slopes let the effect of a feature vary by group (in addition to a random intercept).

```python
import nextstat

# Two groups with different slopes (toy example).
X = [[0.0], [1.0], [2.0], [0.0], [1.0], [2.0]]
y = [0.0, 1.0, 2.0, 0.0, 2.0, 4.0]
group_idx = [0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1]

m = nextstat.hier.linear_random_slope(
    x=X,
    y=y,
    group_idx=group_idx,
    n_groups=2,
    random_slope_feature_idx=0,  # X has a single feature column
    random_intercept_non_centered=True,
    random_slope_non_centered=True,
)

fit = nextstat.fit(m)
print("nll:", fit.nll)
```

Notes:
- `random_slope_feature_idx` indexes into **feature columns** (the same `x` you pass in; the intercept is handled separately).
- Non-centered parameterizations can help sampling in hierarchical models; they’re exposed as `*_non_centered=True`.

Commit message:

v0.9.2 — GPU-native L-BFGS, multi-channel CUDA, fused SIMD kernels, hybrid likelihood, WASM playground, pharma FOCE/SAEM, churn vertical, inference server, cross-vertical GLM/EVT, NUTS progressive sampling, benchmark suite

docs/tutorials/phase-7-hierarchical.md, after:

# Phase 7: Hierarchical / Multilevel (Random Intercepts)

This tutorial shows the minimal end-to-end flow:

1. Build a hierarchical GLM with a group-indexed random intercept
2. Run MAP fit (`nextstat.fit`)
3. Run NUTS (`nextstat.sample` for the raw dict, or `nextstat.bayes.sample` for ArviZ `InferenceData`)

See also:
- Phase 6 (regression / GLMs): `docs/tutorials/phase-6-regression.md`

## Assumptions and diagnostics (quick checklist)

- Random effects are typically modeled as **Normal** and **exchangeable** across groups.
- Partial pooling assumes groups come from a shared population (shrinkage toward a common mean).
- If some groups are tiny or highly imbalanced, posteriors can be weakly identified; consider stronger priors.
- For Bayesian fits, always check sampling diagnostics (`raw["diagnostics"]["quality"]`, or `idata.attrs["nextstat_diagnostics"]["quality"]` if you used `nextstat.bayes.sample`) and do posterior predictive checks (see PPC section).

## Logistic regression with random intercept

```python
import nextstat

# Toy dataset: 2 groups, 1 feature, binary outcome.
X = [[0.0], [1.0], [0.0], [1.0], [0.0], [1.0]]
y = [0, 1, 0, 1, 0, 1]
group_idx = [0, 0, 1, 1, 0, 1]

m = nextstat.hier.logistic_random_intercept(
    x=X,
    y=y,
    group_idx=group_idx,
    n_groups=2,
    coef_prior_mu=0.0,
    coef_prior_sigma=10.0,
)

fit = nextstat.fit(m)
print("nll:", fit.nll)
print("bestfit dim:", len(fit.bestfit))

raw = nextstat.sample(
    m,
    n_chains=4,
    n_warmup=500,
    n_samples=1000,
    seed=42,
    init_jitter_rel=0.10,
)
print(raw["diagnostics"]["quality"])
```

Notes:
- `group_idx[i]` selects the group for observation `i`.
- The random intercept is a partially-pooled Normal effect (group intercepts share hyperparameters).
- Sampling seeds are deterministic per chain: chain `i` uses `seed + i`.
- Initialization options are mutually exclusive (set at most one): `init_jitter`, `init_jitter_rel`, `init_overdispersed_rel`.

## Posterior Predictive Checks (PPC)

PPC answers: "Does the fitted model generate data that looks like what we observed?"

NextStat provides lightweight helpers in `nextstat.ppc` that work on the raw dict
returned by `nextstat.sample` (or `nextstat.bayes.sample(..., return_idata=False)`) (no ArviZ required).

```python
import nextstat

spec = nextstat.data.GlmSpec.logistic_regression(
    x=X,
    y=y,
    include_intercept=False,
    group_idx=group_idx,
    n_groups=2,
    coef_prior_mu=0.0,
    coef_prior_sigma=1.0,
)
m = spec.build()

raw = nextstat.sample(m, n_chains=2, n_warmup=300, n_samples=300, seed=1, init_jitter_rel=0.1)
ppc = nextstat.ppc.ppc_glm_from_sample(spec, raw, n_draws=50, seed=0)
print("observed:", ppc.observed)
print("replicated[0]:", ppc.replicated[0])
```

## Linear regression with random intercept

```python
import nextstat

X = [[0.0], [1.0], [2.0], [3.0]]
y = [0.2, 1.1, 2.0, 3.2]
group_idx = [0, 0, 1, 1]

m = nextstat.hier.linear_random_intercept(
    x=X,
    y=y,
    group_idx=group_idx,
    n_groups=2,
)

fit = nextstat.fit(m)
print("nll:", fit.nll)
```

## Linear regression with random slope

Random slopes let the effect of a feature vary by group (in addition to a random intercept).

```python
import nextstat

# Two groups with different slopes (toy example).
X = [[0.0], [1.0], [2.0], [0.0], [1.0], [2.0]]
y = [0.0, 1.0, 2.0, 0.0, 2.0, 4.0]
group_idx = [0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1]

m = nextstat.hier.linear_random_slope(
    x=X,
    y=y,
    group_idx=group_idx,
    n_groups=2,
    random_slope_feature_idx=0,  # X has a single feature column
    random_intercept_non_centered=True,
    random_slope_non_centered=True,
)

fit = nextstat.fit(m)
print("nll:", fit.nll)
```

Notes:
- `random_slope_feature_idx` indexes into **feature columns** (the same `x` you pass in; the intercept is handled separately).
- Non-centered parameterizations can help sampling in hierarchical models; they’re exposed as `*_non_centered=True`.
