docs/references/cli.md, before:

---
title: "CLI Reference (nextstat)"
status: stable
---

# CLI Reference (nextstat)

The `nextstat` CLI is implemented in `crates/ns-cli` and focuses on:
- deterministic parity mode (`--threads 1`)
- JSON in / JSON out contracts for reproducible workflows

## Commands (high level)

For the configuration file format, see `docs/references/analysis-config.md`.

HEP / HistFactory:
- `nextstat validate --config analysis.yaml`
- `nextstat config schema [--name analysis_spec_v0]`
- `nextstat import histfactory --xml combination.xml --output workspace.json`
- `nextstat import trex-config --config trex.txt --output workspace.json [--analysis-yaml analysis.yaml] [--coverage-json coverage.json] [--expr-coverage-json expr_coverage.json]`
- `nextstat import patchset --workspace BkgOnly.json --patchset patchset.json [--patch-name ...]`
- `nextstat build-hists --config trex.config --out-dir out/ [--base-dir ...] [--coverage-json coverage.json] [--expr-coverage-json expr_coverage.json]`
- `nextstat trex import-config --config trex.config --out analysis.yaml [--report analysis.mapping.json]`
- `nextstat fit --input workspace.json [--gpu cuda]`
- `nextstat hypotest --input workspace.json --mu 1.0 [--expected-set]`
- `nextstat hypotest-toys --input workspace.json --mu 1.0 [--n-toys 1000 --seed 42] [--expected-set] [--threads 0] [--gpu cuda|metal]`
- `nextstat upper-limit --input workspace.json [--expected] [--scan-start ... --scan-stop ... --scan-points ...]`
- `nextstat scan --input workspace.json --start 0 --stop 5 --points 21 [--gpu cuda]`
- `nextstat viz profile --input workspace.json ...`
- `nextstat viz cls --input workspace.json ...`
- `nextstat viz ranking --input workspace.json`
- `nextstat viz pulls --input workspace.json --fit fit.json`
- `nextstat viz corr --input workspace.json --fit fit.json`
- `nextstat viz distributions --input workspace.json --histfactory-xml combination.xml [--fit fit.json]`
- `nextstat report --input workspace.json --histfactory-xml combination.xml --out-dir report/ [--fit fit.json] [--render]`

Time series (Phase 8):
- `nextstat timeseries kalman-filter --input kalman_1d.json`
- `nextstat timeseries kalman-smooth --input kalman_1d.json`
- `nextstat timeseries kalman-em --input kalman_1d.json ...`
- `nextstat timeseries kalman-fit --input kalman_1d.json ...`
- `nextstat timeseries kalman-forecast --input kalman_1d.json ...`
- `nextstat timeseries kalman-simulate --input kalman_1d.json ...`

Survival analysis (Phase 9):
- `nextstat survival cox-ph-fit --input cox.json [--ties efron|breslow] [--no-robust] [--no-cluster-correction] [--no-baseline]`

## GPU acceleration

The `--gpu <device>` flag enables GPU acceleration, where `<device>` is one of:

- **`cuda`** — NVIDIA GPU (f64 precision). Requires `cuda` feature and an NVIDIA GPU at runtime.
- **`metal`** — Apple Silicon GPU (f32 precision). Requires `metal` feature and Apple Silicon (M1+) at runtime. Currently supported only for `hypotest-toys` (batch toy fitting).

Without `--gpu`, the standard CPU (SIMD/Rayon + Accelerate) path is used. If the requested GPU is not available at runtime, the command exits with an error.

### Build with GPU support

```bash
# CUDA (NVIDIA)
cargo build -p ns-cli --features cuda --release

# Metal (Apple Silicon)
cargo build -p ns-cli --features metal --release

# Both
cargo build -p ns-cli --features "cuda,metal" --release
```

### Supported commands

**`fit --gpu cuda`** — Single-model MLE fit on CUDA GPU. Uses `GpuSession` for fused NLL+gradient (1 kernel launch per L-BFGS iteration). Hessian computed via finite differences of GPU gradient at the end. Metal is not supported for single-model fit (use CPU).

```bash
nextstat fit --input workspace.json --gpu cuda
```

**`scan --gpu cuda`** — GPU-accelerated profile likelihood scan. A single `GpuSession` is shared across all scan points with warm-start between mu values. Metal is not supported for scan (use CPU).

```bash
nextstat scan --input workspace.json --start 0 --stop 5 --points 21 --gpu cuda
```

**`hypotest-toys --gpu cuda|metal`** — Batch toy fitting on GPU. The lockstep GPU batch optimizer computes NLL + analytical gradient for all toys in a single kernel launch per iteration. Both CUDA (f64) and Metal (f32) backends are supported.

```bash
# CUDA (NVIDIA, f64)
nextstat hypotest-toys --input workspace.json --mu 1.0 --n-toys 10000 --gpu cuda

# Metal (Apple Silicon, f32 — tolerance relaxed to 1e-3)
nextstat hypotest-toys --input workspace.json --mu 1.0 --n-toys 10000 --gpu metal
```

## Determinism and Parity Mode

NextStat separates "specification correctness" (pyhf parity) from "speed" via two evaluation modes:

### `--parity` flag (recommended)

```bash
nextstat fit --input workspace.json --parity
```

When `--parity` is active:
1. **EvalMode::Parity** is set process-wide
2. **Kahan compensated summation** replaces naive `+=` in Poisson NLL
3. **Apple Accelerate** is automatically disabled
4. **Thread count forced to 1** (sequential Rayon)
5. Results are **bit-exact reproducible** across runs

### `--threads 1` (legacy)

```bash
nextstat fit --input workspace.json --threads 1
```

Same as `--parity` but without Kahan summation. Use `--parity` instead for full determinism.

### Environment variable

```bash
NEXTSTAT_DISABLE_ACCELERATE=1 nextstat fit --input workspace.json
```

Disables Apple Accelerate only, without forcing single-thread or Kahan.

### Tolerance contract

| Tier | Metric | Parity Tolerance | Fast Tolerance |
|------|--------|-----------------|----------------|
| 1 | Per-bin expected data | 1e-12 | 1e-10 |
| 2 | Expected data vector | 1e-8 | 1e-8 |
| 3 | NLL value | 1e-8 atol | 1e-6 rtol |
| 4 | Gradient (AD vs FD) | 1e-6 atol | 1e-6 atol |
| 5 | Best-fit params | 2e-4 | 2e-4 |
| 6 | Uncertainties | 5e-4 | 5e-4 |
| 7 | Toy ensemble | 0.03–0.05 | 0.03–0.05 |

Full details: `docs/pyhf-parity-contract.md`.

### Python API equivalent

```python
import nextstat
nextstat.set_eval_mode("parity")  # or "fast" (default)
print(nextstat.get_eval_mode())
```

## Upper limit: bisection vs scan mode

`upper-limit` supports two modes:

1. Bisection (root finding): default.
2. Scan mode: provide `--scan-start`, `--scan-stop`, `--scan-points` to compute limits from a dense CLs curve.

Scan mode is useful for:
- storing a full curve for plotting
- avoiding repeated root-finding (including expected-set curves)

## JSON contracts

The CLI outputs pretty JSON to stdout by default, or to `--output`.

`nextstat validate --config ...` validates either:
- legacy `nextstat run` config (`run.yaml`/`run.json`), or
- analysis spec v0 (`schema_version: trex_analysis_spec_v0`)

It prints a small JSON summary (`config_type: run_config_legacy|analysis_spec_v0`) and exits non-zero on validation errors.

`nextstat report` writes multiple artifacts into `--out-dir` (currently: `distributions.json`, `pulls.json`, `corr.json`, `yields.json`, `uncertainty.json`, plus `yields.csv` and `yields.tex`). `uncertainty.json` is ranking-based and can be skipped via `--skip-uncertainty`. When `--render` is enabled it calls `python -m nextstat.report render ...` to produce a multi-page PDF and per-plot SVGs (requires `matplotlib`, see `nextstat[viz]` extra).

If `--fit` is omitted, `nextstat report` runs an MLE fit itself and writes `fit.json` into `--out-dir` before producing the report artifacts.

For time series input formats, see:
- `docs/tutorials/phase-8-timeseries.md`

For the frequentist (CLs) workflow, see:
- `docs/tutorials/phase-3.1-frequentist.md`

## Import notes

`nextstat import trex-config` currently supports only a small subset of TRExFitter configs:
- `ReadFrom: NTUP` (or omitted).
- `Region:` blocks with `Variable`, `Binning`, optional `Selection`.
- `Sample:` blocks with `File`, optional `Weight`, and optional simple modifiers (`NormFactor`, `NormSys`, `StatError`).
- `Systematic:` blocks for `Type: norm|weight|tree` applied by `Samples:` and optional `Regions:`.

`ReadFrom: HIST` is supported only as a wrapper over an existing HistFactory export:
- Provide `HistoPath: /path/to/export_dir` (must contain exactly one `combination.xml` under it), or
- Provide `CombinationXml: /path/to/combination.xml` explicitly.

Partial TREx semantics in `ReadFrom: HIST`:
- If the config includes `Region:` blocks, they act as an **include-list** for channels (in config order).
- If the config includes `Sample:` blocks, they act as an **include-list** for samples; per-sample `Regions:` filters
  are respected to mask samples per-channel. Empty channels are dropped unless channels were explicitly selected via
  `Region:` blocks (then it is an error).
- When `HistoPath` is provided, it is used as the **base directory** for resolving relative paths inside the HistFactory XML
  (common when `combination.xml` lives under `config/` but ROOT inputs are referenced from the export root).

Optional outputs:
- `--analysis-yaml` writes an analysis spec v0 wrapper (`inputs.mode=trex_config_txt`) to drive `nextstat run`.
- `--coverage-json` writes a best-effort report of unknown keys/attrs to help parity work against legacy configs.
- `--expr-coverage-json` writes a report of expression-bearing keys (selection/weight/variable + weight systematics) and
  whether they compile under NextStat's ROOT-dialect expression engine.

`nextstat trex import-config` is a best-effort migration helper for TRExFitter `.config` files:
- it emits an analysis spec v0 YAML using `inputs.mode=trex_config_yaml`
- it also writes a mapping report listing mapped and unmapped keys

Example config: `docs/examples/trex_config_ntup_minimal.txt`.
Example config (HIST wrapper): `docs/examples/trex_config_hist_minimal.txt`.

Commit message:

Add HS3 v0.2 native support, ML modules (mlops/interpret), PyTorch layers (SignificanceLoss/SoftHistogram), signal Jacobian API, array bridge, bulk API exports
- Add HS3 v0.2 ingestion: auto-detect pyhf vs HS3 at load time, full modifier coverage (NormFactor/NormSys/HistoSys/StatError/ShapeSys/ShapeFactor/Lumi)
- Add `HistFactoryModel.from_hs3()` Python binding with analysis/param_points selection
- Add CLI auto-detection: `nextstat fit` transparently handles both pyhf and HS3 JSON
- Expose `ml

docs/references/cli.md, after:

---
title: "CLI Reference (nextstat)"
status: stable
---

# CLI Reference (nextstat)

The `nextstat` CLI is implemented in `crates/ns-cli` and focuses on:
- deterministic parity mode (`--threads 1`)
- JSON in / JSON out contracts for reproducible workflows

## Commands (high level)

For the configuration file format, see `docs/references/analysis-config.md`.

HEP / HistFactory (pyhf JSON and HS3 JSON auto-detected):
- `nextstat validate --config analysis.yaml`
- `nextstat config schema [--name analysis_spec_v0]`
- `nextstat import histfactory --xml combination.xml --output workspace.json`
- `nextstat import trex-config --config trex.txt --output workspace.json [--analysis-yaml analysis.yaml] [--coverage-json coverage.json] [--expr-coverage-json expr_coverage.json]`
- `nextstat import patchset --workspace BkgOnly.json --patchset patchset.json [--patch-name ...]`
- `nextstat build-hists --config trex.config --out-dir out/ [--base-dir ...] [--coverage-json coverage.json] [--expr-coverage-json expr_coverage.json]`
- `nextstat trex import-config --config trex.config --out analysis.yaml [--report analysis.mapping.json]`
- `nextstat fit --input workspace.json [--gpu cuda]`
- `nextstat hypotest --input workspace.json --mu 1.0 [--expected-set]`
- `nextstat hypotest-toys --input workspace.json --mu 1.0 [--n-toys 1000 --seed 42] [--expected-set] [--threads 0] [--gpu cuda|metal]`
- `nextstat upper-limit --input workspace.json [--expected] [--scan-start ... --scan-stop ... --scan-points ...]`
- `nextstat scan --input workspace.json --start 0 --stop 5 --points 21 [--gpu cuda]`
- `nextstat viz profile --input workspace.json ...`
- `nextstat viz cls --input workspace.json ...`
- `nextstat viz ranking --input workspace.json`
- `nextstat viz pulls --input workspace.json --fit fit.json`
- `nextstat viz corr --input workspace.json --fit fit.json`
- `nextstat viz distributions --input workspace.json --histfactory-xml combination.xml [--fit fit.json]`
- `nextstat report --input workspace.json --histfactory-xml combination.xml --out-dir report/ [--fit fit.json] [--render]`

Time series (Phase 8):
- `nextstat timeseries kalman-filter --input kalman_1d.json`
- `nextstat timeseries kalman-smooth --input kalman_1d.json`
- `nextstat timeseries kalman-em --input kalman_1d.json ...`
- `nextstat timeseries kalman-fit --input kalman_1d.json ...`
- `nextstat timeseries kalman-forecast --input kalman_1d.json ...`
- `nextstat timeseries kalman-simulate --input kalman_1d.json ...`

Survival analysis (Phase 9):
- `nextstat survival cox-ph-fit --input cox.json [--ties efron|breslow] [--no-robust] [--no-cluster-correction] [--no-baseline]`

## GPU acceleration

The `--gpu <device>` flag enables GPU acceleration, where `<device>` is one of:

- **`cuda`** — NVIDIA GPU (f64 precision). Requires `cuda` feature and an NVIDIA GPU at runtime.
- **`metal`** — Apple Silicon GPU (f32 precision). Requires `metal` feature and Apple Silicon (M1+) at runtime. Currently supported only for `hypotest-toys` (batch toy fitting).

Without `--gpu`, the standard CPU (SIMD/Rayon + Accelerate) path is used. If the requested GPU is not available at runtime, the command exits with an error.

### Build with GPU support

```bash
# CUDA (NVIDIA)
cargo build -p ns-cli --features cuda --release

# Metal (Apple Silicon)
cargo build -p ns-cli --features metal --release

# Both
cargo build -p ns-cli --features "cuda,metal" --release
```

### Supported commands

**`fit --gpu cuda`** — Single-model MLE fit on CUDA GPU. Uses `GpuSession` for fused NLL+gradient (1 kernel launch per L-BFGS iteration). Hessian computed via finite differences of GPU gradient at the end. Metal is not supported for single-model fit (use CPU).

```bash
nextstat fit --input workspace.json --gpu cuda
```

**`scan --gpu cuda`** — GPU-accelerated profile likelihood scan. A single `GpuSession` is shared across all scan points with warm-start between mu values. Metal is not supported for scan (use CPU).

```bash
nextstat scan --input workspace.json --start 0 --stop 5 --points 21 --gpu cuda
```

**`hypotest-toys --gpu cuda|metal`** — Batch toy fitting on GPU. The lockstep GPU batch optimizer computes NLL + analytical gradient for all toys in a single kernel launch per iteration. Both CUDA (f64) and Metal (f32) backends are supported.

```bash
# CUDA (NVIDIA, f64)
nextstat hypotest-toys --input workspace.json --mu 1.0 --n-toys 10000 --gpu cuda

# Metal (Apple Silicon, f32 — tolerance relaxed to 1e-3)
nextstat hypotest-toys --input workspace.json --mu 1.0 --n-toys 10000 --gpu metal
```

## Determinism and Parity Mode

NextStat separates "specification correctness" (pyhf parity) from "speed" via two evaluation modes:

### `--parity` flag (recommended)

```bash
nextstat fit --input workspace.json --parity
```

When `--parity` is active:
1. **EvalMode::Parity** is set process-wide
2. **Kahan compensated summation** replaces naive `+=` in Poisson NLL
3. **Apple Accelerate** is automatically disabled
4. **Thread count forced to 1** (sequential Rayon)
5. Results are **bit-exact reproducible** across runs

### `--threads 1` (legacy)

```bash
nextstat fit --input workspace.json --threads 1
```

Same as `--parity` but without Kahan summation. Use `--parity` instead for full determinism.

### Environment variable

```bash
NEXTSTAT_DISABLE_ACCELERATE=1 nextstat fit --input workspace.json
```

Disables Apple Accelerate only, without forcing single-thread or Kahan.

### Tolerance contract

| Tier | Metric | Parity Tolerance | Fast Tolerance |
|------|--------|-----------------|----------------|
| 1 | Per-bin expected data | 1e-12 | 1e-10 |
| 2 | Expected data vector | 1e-8 | 1e-8 |
| 3 | NLL value | 1e-8 atol | 1e-6 rtol |
| 4 | Gradient (AD vs FD) | 1e-6 atol | 1e-6 atol |
| 5 | Best-fit params | 2e-4 | 2e-4 |
| 6 | Uncertainties | 5e-4 | 5e-4 |
| 7 | Toy ensemble | 0.03–0.05 | 0.03–0.05 |

Full details: `docs/pyhf-parity-contract.md`.

### Python API equivalent

```python
import nextstat
nextstat.set_eval_mode("parity")  # or "fast" (default)
print(nextstat.get_eval_mode())
```

## Upper limit: bisection vs scan mode

`upper-limit` supports two modes:

1. Bisection (root finding): default.
2. Scan mode: provide `--scan-start`, `--scan-stop`, `--scan-points` to compute limits from a dense CLs curve.

Scan mode is useful for:
- storing a full curve for plotting
- avoiding repeated root-finding (including expected-set curves)

## JSON contracts

The CLI outputs pretty JSON to stdout by default, or to `--output`.

`nextstat validate --config ...` validates either:
- legacy `nextstat run` config (`run.yaml`/`run.json`), or
- analysis spec v0 (`schema_version: trex_analysis_spec_v0`)

It prints a small JSON summary (`config_type: run_config_legacy|analysis_spec_v0`) and exits non-zero on validation errors.

`nextstat report` writes multiple artifacts into `--out-dir` (currently: `distributions.json`, `pulls.json`, `corr.json`, `yields.json`, `uncertainty.json`, plus `yields.csv` and `yields.tex`). `uncertainty.json` is ranking-based and can be skipped via `--skip-uncertainty`. When `--render` is enabled it calls `python -m nextstat.report render ...` to produce a multi-page PDF and per-plot SVGs (requires `matplotlib`, see `nextstat[viz]` extra).

If `--fit` is omitted, `nextstat report` runs an MLE fit itself and writes `fit.json` into `--out-dir` before producing the report artifacts.

For time series input formats, see:
- `docs/tutorials/phase-8-timeseries.md`

For the frequentist (CLs) workflow, see:
- `docs/tutorials/phase-3.1-frequentist.md`

## Input format auto-detection (pyhf vs HS3)

All commands that accept `--input workspace.json` automatically detect the JSON format:

- **pyhf JSON** — standard HistFactory workspace with `"channels"` + `"measurements"` at top level.
- **HS3 JSON** — HEP Statistics Serialization Standard (v0.2) with `"distributions"` + `"metadata"` (containing `"hs3_version"`), as produced by ROOT 6.37+.

Detection is instant (prefix scan of the first ~2 KB). No `--format` flag is needed.

```bash
# pyhf workspace (auto-detected)
nextstat fit --input workspace.json

# HS3 workspace from ROOT (auto-detected)
nextstat fit --input workspace-postFit_PTV.json

# Both produce the same HistFactoryModel internally
```

When HS3 is detected, the CLI uses ROOT HistFactory default interpolation codes (Code1 for NormSys, Code0 for HistoSys) and selects the first analysis and `"default_values"` parameter point set.

## Import notes

`nextstat import trex-config` currently supports only a small subset of TRExFitter configs:
- `ReadFrom: NTUP` (or omitted).
- `Region:` blocks with `Variable`, `Binning`, optional `Selection`.
- `Sample:` blocks with `File`, optional `Weight`, and optional simple modifiers (`NormFactor`, `NormSys`, `StatError`).
- `Systematic:` blocks for `Type: norm|weight|tree` applied by `Samples:` and optional `Regions:`.

`ReadFrom: HIST` is supported only as a wrapper over an existing HistFactory export:
- Provide `HistoPath: /path/to/export_dir` (must contain exactly one `combination.xml` under it), or
- Provide `CombinationXml: /path/to/combination.xml` explicitly.

Partial TREx semantics in `ReadFrom: HIST`:
- If the config includes `Region:` blocks, they act as an **include-list** for channels (in config order).
- If the config includes `Sample:` blocks, they act as an **include-list** for samples; per-sample `Regions:` filters
  are respected to mask samples per-channel. Empty channels are dropped unless channels were explicitly selected via
  `Region:` blocks (then it is an error).
- When `HistoPath` is provided, it is used as the **base directory** for resolving relative paths inside the HistFactory XML
  (common when `combination.xml` lives under `config/` but ROOT inputs are referenced from the export root).

Optional outputs:
- `--analysis-yaml` writes an analysis spec v0 wrapper (`inputs.mode=trex_config_txt`) to drive `nextstat run`.
- `--coverage-json` writes a best-effort report of unknown keys/attrs to help parity work against legacy configs.
- `--expr-coverage-json` writes a report of expression-bearing keys (selection/weight/variable + weight systematics) and
  whether they compile under NextStat's ROOT-dialect expression engine.

`nextstat trex import-config` is a best-effort migration helper for TRExFitter `.config` files:
- it emits an analysis spec v0 YAML using `inputs.mode=trex_config_yaml`
- it also writes a mapping report listing mapped and unmapped keys

Example config: `docs/examples/trex_config_ntup_minimal.txt`.
Example config (HIST wrapper): `docs/examples/trex_config_hist_minimal.txt`.
