docs/references/validation-report.md, before:

---
title: "Validation Report Artifacts"
status: shipped
---

# Validation Report Artifacts

NextStat produces two categories of validation artifacts: **Apex2 JSON reports** (shipped) and a **unified validation report pack** (JSON + PDF) produced by `nextstat validation-report`.

## Apex2 JSON Reports (Shipped)

### Master Report

The master runner (`tests/apex2_master_report.py`) aggregates all validation suites into a single JSON:

```bash
PYTHONPATH=bindings/ns-py/python \
  python tests/apex2_master_report.py \
    --deterministic \
    --out tmp/apex2_master_report.json
```

**Top-level schema:**

```json
{
  "meta": {
    "timestamp": 1738944000,
    "python": "3.12.0",
    "platform": "macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit",
    "wall_s": 12.3
  },
  "pyhf":                 { "status": "ok|fail|skipped", ... },
  "histfactory_golden":   { "status": "ok|fail|skipped", ... },
  "survival":             { "status": "ok|fail|skipped", ... },
  "survival_statsmodels": { "status": "ok|fail|skipped", ... },
  "regression_golden":    { "status": "ok|fail|skipped", ... },
  "timeseries":           { "status": "ok|fail|skipped", ... },
  "pharma":               { "status": "ok|fail|skipped", ... },
  "pharma_reference":     { "status": "ok|fail|skipped", ... },
  "nuts_quality":         { "status": "ok|fail|skipped", ... },
  "nuts_quality_report":  { "status": "ok|fail|skipped", ... },
  "p6_glm_bench":         { "status": "ok|fail|skipped", ... },
  "bias_pulls":           { "status": "ok|fail|skipped", ... },
  "sbc":                  { "status": "ok|fail|skipped", ... },
  "root":                 { "status": "ok|fail|skipped", ... }
}
```

Each section includes environment metadata (Python version, platform, package versions, seeds) and per-case pass/fail with numeric deltas.

### Deterministic Mode

The `--deterministic` flag strips non-reproducible keys (timestamps, wall-clock timings, subprocess output) and applies stable JSON key ordering via `_apex2_json.py`. This ensures bit-exact JSON output across runs on the same platform.

### Individual Runners

| Runner | Output | Purpose |
|--------|--------|---------|
| `apex2_pyhf_validation_report.py` | `tmp/apex2_pyhf_report.json` | NLL + expected_data parity vs pyhf |
| `apex2_root_suite_report.py` | `tmp/apex2_root_suite_report.json` | Profile scan parity vs ROOT/RooFit |
| `apex2_bias_pulls_report.py` | `tmp/apex2_bias_pulls_report.json` | Toy-based μ̂ bias and pull widths |
| `apex2_sbc_report.py` | `tmp/apex2_sbc_report.json` | SBC rank uniformity (NUTS) |
| `apex2_nuts_quality_report.py` | `tmp/apex2_nuts_quality_report.json` | Divergence rate, R-hat, ESS, E-BFMI |
| `apex2_p6_glm_benchmark_report.py` | `tmp/apex2_p6_glm_bench_report.json` | GLM fit/predict performance |
| `apex2_survival_statsmodels_report.py` | `tmp/apex2_survival_statsmodels_report.json` | Cox PH parity vs statsmodels |
| `apex2_pharma_reference_report.py` | `tmp/apex2_pharma_reference_report.json` | Simulated PK/NLME reference suite (analytic PK + fit smoke) |
| `aggregate_apex2_root_suite_reports.py` | `tmp/apex2_root_suite_aggregate.json` | Merge HTCondor per-case reports |

### HTCondor / Job Array Support

For large ROOT suite runs, each case can be dispatched as an independent job:

```bash
# Per-case (HTCondor array element):
python tests/apex2_root_suite_report.py \
  --case-index $PROCESS --cases cases.json --out tmp/apex2_root_case_${PROCESS}.json

# Aggregate:
python tests/aggregate_apex2_root_suite_reports.py \
  --in-dir tmp/ --glob 'apex2_root_case_*.json' --out tmp/apex2_root_suite_aggregate.json
```

## Analysis Report (`nextstat report`, Shipped)

The `nextstat report` CLI generates per-workspace analysis artifacts:

```bash
nextstat report \
  --input workspace.json \
  --histfactory-xml combination.xml \
  --out-dir report/ \
  [--fit fit.json] \
  [--render] \
  [--blind] \
  [--deterministic] \
  [--skip-uncertainty]
```

**Outputs:**

| File | Content |
|------|---------|
| `distributions.json` | Expected yields per channel/sample |
| `pulls.json` | Nuisance parameter pulls (θ̂ ± σ) |
| `corr.json` | Parameter correlation matrix |
| `yields.json` / `.csv` / `.tex` | Yield tables |
| `uncertainty.json` | NP ranking (systematic impact) |
| `fit.json` | MLE result (if `--fit` omitted) |

When `--render` is enabled, calls `python -m nextstat.report render` to produce:
- Multi-page PDF with all plots
- Per-plot SVGs

Requires `nextstat[viz]` extra (matplotlib).

## Validation Report Pack (Shipped: v1)

The `nextstat validation-report` command produces a unified document combining Apex2 results with workspace-level metadata for regulated review workflows.

### CLI

```bash
nextstat validation-report \
  --apex2 tmp/apex2_master_report.json \
  --workspace workspace.json \
  --out validation_report.json \
  [--pdf validation_report.pdf] \
  [--deterministic]
```

Schema is available via:

```bash
nextstat config schema --name validation_report_v1
```

Example JSON is in `docs/specs/validation_report_v1.example.json`.

### Tests

The `nextstat validation-report` CLI has integration tests covering deterministic JSON output and the minimum required `regulated_review` fields:

```bash
cargo test -p ns-cli --test cli_validation_report
```

CI runs these invariants explicitly in the `Rust Tests` workflow (`.github/workflows/rust-tests.yml`) on `ubuntu-latest` + `stable`.

CI also exercises the end-to-end `validation-pack/render_validation_pack.sh` flow in the `Python Tests` workflow (`.github/workflows/python-tests.yml`) on `ubuntu-latest` + Python 3.13, including:

- Schema validation for `validation_report.json`
- A deterministic re-render check (JSON+PDF hashes match across two runs)
- A `--json-only` smoke run (no PDF / no matplotlib dependency path)

### Single Entrypoint (Local + CI)

To generate a complete "validation pack" (Apex2 master + unified JSON + publishable PDF) in one command:

```bash
make validation-pack
```

This calls:

```bash
bash validation-pack/render_validation_pack.sh \
  --out-dir tmp/validation_pack \
  --workspace tests/fixtures/complex_workspace.json \
  --deterministic
```

To generate JSON only (skip PDF rendering and the `matplotlib` dependency):

```bash
bash validation-pack/render_validation_pack.sh \
  --out-dir tmp/validation_pack \
  --workspace tests/fixtures/complex_workspace.json \
  --deterministic \
  --json-only
```

To render a deterministic PDF locally from fixtures (useful for quick sanity checks):

```bash
bash validation-pack/render_validation_pack.sh \
  --out-dir tmp/validation_pack_fixture \
  --workspace tests/fixtures/simple_workspace.json \
  --apex2-master tests/fixtures/apex2_master_min_plus.json \
  --deterministic
```

**Outputs (in `--out-dir`):**

- `apex2_master_report.json`
- `validation_report.json`
- `validation_report.pdf` (unless `--json-only`)
- `validation_pack_manifest.json` (SHA-256 + sizes for the core pack files; convenient for signing/replication)
- `validation_report_v1.schema.json`

Notes:

- PDF rendering requires `matplotlib` (install via `pip install 'nextstat[viz]'`).
- To override the Python interpreter used by the validation pack script, pass `--python /path/to/python3` to `validation-pack/render_validation_pack.sh`.
- `--nuts-quality` enables the (potentially slower) NUTS quality report for richer diagnostics.

### Schema (`validation_report.json`)

```json
{
  "schema_version": "validation_report_v1",
  "generated_at": "2026-02-08T17:00:00Z",
  "deterministic": true,

  "dataset_fingerprint": {
    "workspace_sha256": "a1b2c3...",
    "workspace_bytes": 12345,
    "channels": ["SR", "CR1", "CR2"],
    "n_channels": 3,
    "n_bins_per_channel": [10, 5, 5],
    "n_samples_total": 12,
    "n_parameters": 47,
    "observation_summary": {
      "total_observed": 1234.0,
      "min_bin": 0.0,
      "max_bin": 312.0
    }
  },

  "model_spec": {
    "poi": "mu",
    "parameters": [
      {"name": "mu", "init": 1.0, "bounds": [0.0, 10.0], "constraint": "none"},
      {"name": "alpha_JES", "init": 0.0, "bounds": [-5.0, 5.0], "constraint": "normal"}
    ],
    "interpolation": {"normsys": "code4", "histosys": "code4p"},
    "objective": "poisson_nll_with_constraints",
    "optimizer": "lbfgsb",
    "eval_mode": "fast"
  },

  "environment": {
    "nextstat_version": "0.2.0",
    "nextstat_git_commit": "4844ed0",
    "python_version": "3.12.0",
    "platform": "macOS-26.2-arm64",
    "rust_toolchain": "1.85.0",
    "pyhf_version": "0.7.6",
    "determinism_settings": {"eval_mode": "fast", "threads": 8}
  },

  "apex2_summary": {
    "master_report_sha256": "d4e5f6...",
    "suites": {
      "pyhf":              {"status": "ok", "n_cases": 9, "worst_delta_nll": 1.2e-10},
      "histfactory_golden": {"status": "ok"},
      "regression_golden":  {"status": "ok", "n_cases": 8, "n_ok": 8},
      "timeseries":         {"status": "ok"},
      "pharma":             {"status": "ok"},
      "pharma_reference":   {"status": "ok", "n_cases": 3, "n_ok": 3},
      "survival":           {"status": "ok"},
      "nuts_quality":       {"status": "ok"},
      "root":               {"status": "ok", "n_cases": 3}
    },
    "overall": "pass"
  },

  "regulated_review": {
    "contains_raw_data": false,
    "intended_use": "...",
    "scope": "...",
    "limitations": ["..."],
    "data_handling": {"notes": ["..."]},
    "risk_based_assurance": [
      {"risk": "...", "mitigation": "...", "evidence": ["apex2:suite:pharma_reference:status=ok"]}
    ]
  }
}
```

### Target Consumers

- **HEP**: analysis preservation, reinterpretation readiness (RECAST/pyhf ecosystem).
- **Pharma**: IQ/OQ/PQ validation packs for regulatory submission support (21 CFR Part 11 awareness).
- **FinTech**: model risk management documentation (SR 11-7 / SS1/23 model inventory).

### Open-Core Boundary

The OSS baseline provides:
- `validation_report.json` (machine-readable, deterministic)
- `validation_report.pdf` (matplotlib-rendered, basic layout)

Enterprise extensions (commercial license) may add:
- Branded PDF templates with corporate identity
- Digital signatures and timestamping
- Integration with audit trail / document management systems
- Automated scheduling and alerting

## Trust-Building Use

For vertical expansion, treat the validation pack as a first-class sales artifact:

- Publish `validation_report.json` + `validation_report.pdf` for each tagged release (or weekly).
- Link it from: homepage footer (Trust), pricing page (Compliance), and enterprise/security page.
- Attach it to outbound emails for regulated prospects (IQ/OQ/PQ, SR 11-7 style review).
- Use the JSON schema to make your claims auditable: “pass/fail + worst-case deltas + hashes”.

Commit message:

ci: reorder json-only validation before PDF + add shellcheck + lazy submodule imports
- Move json-only validation smoke test before PDF rendering to prove minimal environment compatibility first
- Add shellcheck validation for render_validation_pack.sh in rust-tests workflow
- Convert nextstat submodules to lazy imports via __getattr__ to keep base import lightweight
- Refactor execute_tool to apply/restore execution controls once at envelope level instead of per-call
- Add stable_sort_by_key helper in

docs/references/validation-report.md, after:

---
title: "Validation Report Artifacts"
status: shipped
---

# Validation Report Artifacts

NextStat produces two categories of validation artifacts: **Apex2 JSON reports** (shipped) and a **unified validation report pack** (JSON + PDF) produced by `nextstat validation-report`.

## Apex2 JSON Reports (Shipped)

### Master Report

The master runner (`tests/apex2_master_report.py`) aggregates all validation suites into a single JSON:

```bash
PYTHONPATH=bindings/ns-py/python \
  python tests/apex2_master_report.py \
    --deterministic \
    --out tmp/apex2_master_report.json
```

**Top-level schema:**

```json
{
  "meta": {
    "timestamp": 1738944000,
    "python": "3.12.0",
    "platform": "macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit",
    "wall_s": 12.3
  },
  "pyhf":                 { "status": "ok|fail|skipped", ... },
  "histfactory_golden":   { "status": "ok|fail|skipped", ... },
  "survival":             { "status": "ok|fail|skipped", ... },
  "survival_statsmodels": { "status": "ok|fail|skipped", ... },
  "regression_golden":    { "status": "ok|fail|skipped", ... },
  "timeseries":           { "status": "ok|fail|skipped", ... },
  "pharma":               { "status": "ok|fail|skipped", ... },
  "pharma_reference":     { "status": "ok|fail|skipped", ... },
  "nuts_quality":         { "status": "ok|fail|skipped", ... },
  "nuts_quality_report":  { "status": "ok|fail|skipped", ... },
  "p6_glm_bench":         { "status": "ok|fail|skipped", ... },
  "bias_pulls":           { "status": "ok|fail|skipped", ... },
  "sbc":                  { "status": "ok|fail|skipped", ... },
  "root":                 { "status": "ok|fail|skipped", ... }
}
```

Each section includes environment metadata (Python version, platform, package versions, seeds) and per-case pass/fail with numeric deltas.

### Deterministic Mode

The `--deterministic` flag strips non-reproducible keys (timestamps, wall-clock timings, subprocess output) and applies stable JSON key ordering via `_apex2_json.py`. This ensures bit-exact JSON output across runs on the same platform.

### Individual Runners

| Runner | Output | Purpose |
|--------|--------|---------|
| `apex2_pyhf_validation_report.py` | `tmp/apex2_pyhf_report.json` | NLL + expected_data parity vs pyhf |
| `apex2_root_suite_report.py` | `tmp/apex2_root_suite_report.json` | Profile scan parity vs ROOT/RooFit |
| `apex2_bias_pulls_report.py` | `tmp/apex2_bias_pulls_report.json` | Toy-based μ̂ bias and pull widths |
| `apex2_sbc_report.py` | `tmp/apex2_sbc_report.json` | SBC rank uniformity (NUTS) |
| `apex2_nuts_quality_report.py` | `tmp/apex2_nuts_quality_report.json` | Divergence rate, R-hat, ESS, E-BFMI |
| `apex2_p6_glm_benchmark_report.py` | `tmp/apex2_p6_glm_bench_report.json` | GLM fit/predict performance |
| `apex2_survival_statsmodels_report.py` | `tmp/apex2_survival_statsmodels_report.json` | Cox PH parity vs statsmodels |
| `apex2_pharma_reference_report.py` | `tmp/apex2_pharma_reference_report.json` | Simulated PK/NLME reference suite (analytic PK + fit smoke) |
| `aggregate_apex2_root_suite_reports.py` | `tmp/apex2_root_suite_aggregate.json` | Merge HTCondor per-case reports |

### HTCondor / Job Array Support

For large ROOT suite runs, each case can be dispatched as an independent job:

```bash
# Per-case (HTCondor array element):
python tests/apex2_root_suite_report.py \
  --case-index $PROCESS --cases cases.json --out tmp/apex2_root_case_${PROCESS}.json

# Aggregate:
python tests/aggregate_apex2_root_suite_reports.py \
  --in-dir tmp/ --glob 'apex2_root_case_*.json' --out tmp/apex2_root_suite_aggregate.json
```

## Analysis Report (`nextstat report`, Shipped)

The `nextstat report` CLI generates per-workspace analysis artifacts:

```bash
nextstat report \
  --input workspace.json \
  --histfactory-xml combination.xml \
  --out-dir report/ \
  [--fit fit.json] \
  [--render] \
  [--blind] \
  [--deterministic] \
  [--skip-uncertainty]
```

**Outputs:**

| File | Content |
|------|---------|
| `distributions.json` | Expected yields per channel/sample |
| `pulls.json` | Nuisance parameter pulls (θ̂ ± σ) |
| `corr.json` | Parameter correlation matrix |
| `yields.json` / `.csv` / `.tex` | Yield tables |
| `uncertainty.json` | NP ranking (systematic impact) |
| `fit.json` | MLE result (if `--fit` omitted) |

When `--render` is enabled, calls `python -m nextstat.report render` to produce:
- Multi-page PDF with all plots
- Per-plot SVGs

Requires `nextstat[viz]` extra (matplotlib).

## Validation Report Pack (Shipped: v1)

The `nextstat validation-report` command produces a unified document combining Apex2 results with workspace-level metadata for regulated review workflows.

### CLI

```bash
nextstat validation-report \
  --apex2 tmp/apex2_master_report.json \
  --workspace workspace.json \
  --out validation_report.json \
  [--pdf validation_report.pdf] \
  [--deterministic]
```

### Deterministic Output

When `--deterministic` is enabled:

- `generated_at` is set to `null` (timestamps are omitted).
- JSON is written with stable key ordering and stable ordering for set-like arrays.
- Arrays that are intentionally index-aligned (e.g. `channels` with `n_bins_per_channel`) preserve their original order.

Schema is available via:

```bash
nextstat config schema --name validation_report_v1
```

Example JSON is in `docs/specs/validation_report_v1.example.json`.

### Tests

The `nextstat validation-report` CLI has integration tests covering deterministic JSON output and the minimum required `regulated_review` fields:

```bash
cargo test -p ns-cli --test cli_validation_report
```

CI runs these invariants explicitly in the `Rust Tests` workflow (`.github/workflows/rust-tests.yml`) on `ubuntu-latest` + `stable`.

CI also exercises the end-to-end `validation-pack/render_validation_pack.sh` flow in the `Python Tests` workflow (`.github/workflows/python-tests.yml`) on `ubuntu-latest` + Python 3.13, including:

- Schema validation for `validation_report.json`
- A deterministic re-render check (JSON+PDF hashes match across two runs)
- A `--json-only` smoke run (no PDF / no matplotlib dependency path)

### Single Entrypoint (Local + CI)

To generate a complete "validation pack" (Apex2 master + unified JSON + publishable PDF) in one command:

```bash
make validation-pack
```

This calls:

```bash
bash validation-pack/render_validation_pack.sh \
  --out-dir tmp/validation_pack \
  --workspace tests/fixtures/complex_workspace.json \
  --deterministic
```

To generate JSON only (skip PDF rendering and the `matplotlib` dependency):

```bash
bash validation-pack/render_validation_pack.sh \
  --out-dir tmp/validation_pack \
  --workspace tests/fixtures/complex_workspace.json \
  --deterministic \
  --json-only
```

To render a deterministic PDF locally from fixtures (useful for quick sanity checks):

```bash
bash validation-pack/render_validation_pack.sh \
  --out-dir tmp/validation_pack_fixture \
  --workspace tests/fixtures/simple_workspace.json \
  --apex2-master tests/fixtures/apex2_master_min_plus.json \
  --deterministic
```

**Outputs (in `--out-dir`):**

- `apex2_master_report.json`
- `validation_report.json`
- `validation_report.pdf` (unless `--json-only`)
- `validation_pack_manifest.json` (SHA-256 + sizes for the core pack files; convenient for signing/replication)
- `validation_report_v1.schema.json`

Notes:

- PDF rendering requires `matplotlib` (install via `pip install 'nextstat[viz]'`).
- To override the Python interpreter used by the validation pack script, pass `--python /path/to/python3` to `validation-pack/render_validation_pack.sh`.
- `--nuts-quality` enables the (potentially slower) NUTS quality report for richer diagnostics.

### Troubleshooting

- `Missing dependency: matplotlib`:
  - Run with `--json-only` (JSON pack only), or install PDF deps: `pip install 'nextstat[viz]'` (or `pip install matplotlib`).
- `nextstat: command not found`:
  - Build a local CLI and pass it explicitly: `bash validation-pack/render_validation_pack.sh --nextstat-bin target/debug/nextstat ...`
  - Alternatively, the script will fall back to `cargo run -p ns-cli -- ...` when `nextstat` is not in `PATH`.
- Wrong Python interpreter / missing packages:
  - Pass `--python /path/to/python3` (the script auto-prefers `./.venv/bin/python` when present).
- Want to avoid re-running Apex2:
  - Pass an existing master report with `--apex2-master path/to/apex2_master_report.json`.

### Schema (`validation_report.json`)

```json
{
  "schema_version": "validation_report_v1",
  "generated_at": "2026-02-08T17:00:00Z",
  "deterministic": true,

  "dataset_fingerprint": {
    "workspace_sha256": "a1b2c3...",
    "workspace_bytes": 12345,
    "channels": ["SR", "CR1", "CR2"],
    "n_channels": 3,
    "n_bins_per_channel": [10, 5, 5],
    "n_samples_total": 12,
    "n_parameters": 47,
    "observation_summary": {
      "total_observed": 1234.0,
      "min_bin": 0.0,
      "max_bin": 312.0
    }
  },

  "model_spec": {
    "poi": "mu",
    "parameters": [
      {"name": "mu", "init": 1.0, "bounds": [0.0, 10.0], "constraint": "none"},
      {"name": "alpha_JES", "init": 0.0, "bounds": [-5.0, 5.0], "constraint": "normal"}
    ],
    "interpolation": {"normsys": "code4", "histosys": "code4p"},
    "objective": "poisson_nll_with_constraints",
    "optimizer": "lbfgsb",
    "eval_mode": "fast"
  },

  "environment": {
    "nextstat_version": "0.2.0",
    "nextstat_git_commit": "4844ed0",
    "python_version": "3.12.0",
    "platform": "macOS-26.2-arm64",
    "rust_toolchain": "1.85.0",
    "pyhf_version": "0.7.6",
    "determinism_settings": {"eval_mode": "fast", "threads": 8}
  },

  "apex2_summary": {
    "master_report_sha256": "d4e5f6...",
    "suites": {
      "pyhf":              {"status": "ok", "n_cases": 9, "worst_delta_nll": 1.2e-10},
      "histfactory_golden": {"status": "ok"},
      "regression_golden":  {"status": "ok", "n_cases": 8, "n_ok": 8},
      "timeseries":         {"status": "ok"},
      "pharma":             {"status": "ok"},
      "pharma_reference":   {"status": "ok", "n_cases": 3, "n_ok": 3},
      "survival":           {"status": "ok"},
      "nuts_quality":       {"status": "ok"},
      "root":               {"status": "ok", "n_cases": 3}
    },
    "overall": "pass"
  },

  "regulated_review": {
    "contains_raw_data": false,
    "intended_use": "...",
    "scope": "...",
    "limitations": ["..."],
    "data_handling": {"notes": ["..."]},
    "risk_based_assurance": [
      {"risk": "...", "mitigation": "...", "evidence": ["apex2:suite:pharma_reference:status=ok"]}
    ]
  }
}
```

### Target Consumers

- **HEP**: analysis preservation, reinterpretation readiness (RECAST/pyhf ecosystem).
- **Pharma**: IQ/OQ/PQ validation packs for regulatory submission support (21 CFR Part 11 awareness).
- **FinTech**: model risk management documentation (SR 11-7 / SS1/23 model inventory).

### Open-Core Boundary

The OSS baseline provides:
- `validation_report.json` (machine-readable, deterministic)
- `validation_report.pdf` (matplotlib-rendered, basic layout)

Enterprise extensions (commercial license) may add:
- Branded PDF templates with corporate identity
- Digital signatures and timestamping
- Integration with audit trail / document management systems
- Automated scheduling and alerting

## Trust-Building Use

For vertical expansion, treat the validation pack as a first-class sales artifact:

- Publish `validation_report.json` + `validation_report.pdf` for each tagged release (or weekly).
- Link it from: homepage footer (Trust), pricing page (Compliance), and enterprise/security page.
- Attach it to outbound emails for regulated prospects (IQ/OQ/PQ, SR 11-7 style review).
- Use the JSON schema to make your claims auditable: “pass/fail + worst-case deltas + hashes”.
